#Pantheologia or the summe of practical divinity practiz'd in the wilderness, and delivered by our Saviour in his Sermon on the Mount. Being observations upon the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St Matthew. To which is prefixed a prolegomena or preface by way of dialogue, wherein the perfection and perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the calumnies of Anabaptists and Papists. By Tho. White B.L. minister of Gods word at Anne Aldersgate, London.#

##White, Thomas, minister of St. Anne's, Aldersgate.##
Pantheologia or the summe of practical divinity practiz'd in the wilderness, and delivered by our Saviour in his Sermon on the Mount. Being observations upon the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters of St Matthew. To which is prefixed a prolegomena or preface by way of dialogue, wherein the perfection and perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the calumnies of Anabaptists and Papists. By Tho. White B.L. minister of Gods word at Anne Aldersgate, London.
White, Thomas, minister of St. Anne's, Aldersgate.

##General Summary##

**Links**

[TCP catalogue](http://www.ota.ox.ac.uk/tcp/)  • 
[HTML](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-HTML/free/A96/A96361.html)  • 
[EPUB](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-EPUB/free/A96/A96361.epub) • 
[Page images (Historical Texts)](https://historicaltexts.jisc.ac.uk/eebo-99867601e)

**Availability**

To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to https://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information about the project.

**Major revisions**

1. __2012-03__ __TCP__ *Assigned for keying and markup*
1. __2012-03__ __SPi Global__ *Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images*
1. __2012-05__ __Zev Berger__ *Sampled and proofread*
1. __2012-05__ __Zev Berger__ *Text and markup reviewed and edited*
1. __2013-02__ __pfs__ *Batch review (QC) and XML conversion*

##Content Summary##

#####Front#####
ΠΑΝΘΕΟΛΟΓΙΑ, Or the Summe of PRACTICAL DIVINITY Practiz'd in the Wilderneſs, and delivered by our SaWHITES OBSERVATIONSUpon the 4. 5. 6. and 7. Chapters of St MATTHEW.〈1 page duplicate〉
1. The Authours TO THE READER.

#####Body#####

1. OBSERVATIONS Upon the fourth Chapter of MATTHEW.
MATTHEW IV.I.Then was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the wilderneſs, to be tempted of the devil.THeMATTHEW IV.I.Then was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the wilderneſs, to be tempted of the devil.THeVerſ. 2.And when he had faſted fourty dayes and fourty nights, he was afterward an hungred.And when Verſ. 3.And when the tempter came to him, he ſaid, If thou be the ſonne of God, command that theſe ſVerſ. 4.But he anſwered and ſaid, It is written, Man ſhall not live by bread alone, but by every worVerſ. 5.Then the devil taketh him up into the holy City, and ſetteth him on a pinacle of the Temple.Verſ. 6.And ſaith unto him, If thou be the ſonne of God, Caſt thy ſelf down: For it is written. He ſVerſ. 7.Jeſus ſaid unto him, It is written again, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God.And Jeſus ſaVerſ. 8.Again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and ſheweth him all the kingdVerſ. 9.And ſaith unto him, All theſe things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worſhip meVerſ. 10.Then ſaith Jeſus unto him, Get thee behinde, Satan: for it is written, Thou ſhalt worſhip tVerſ. 11.Then the devil leaveth him, and behold Angels came and miniſtred unto him.Then] 1. When ourVerſ. 12.Now when Jeſus had heard that John was caſt into priſon, he departed into Galilee.Now when Verſ. 13.And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the ſea-coaſt, in the bVerſ. 14.That it might be fulfilled which was ſpoken by Eſaias the Prophet, ſaying.That it might be Verſ. 15.The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the ſea beyond Jordan, GalileVerſ. 16.The people which ſat in darkneſſe, ſaw great light: and to them which ſate in the region anVerſ. 17.From that time Jeſus began to preach, and to ſay, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at Verſ. 18.And Jeſus walking by the ſea of Galilee, ſaw two brethren, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew Verſ. 19.And he ſaith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men.And he ſaith unto theVerſ. 20.And they ſtraightway left their nets, and followed him.And they ſtraightway left their netsVerſ. 21.And going on from thence, he ſaw other two brethren, James the ſonne of Zebedee, and John hVerſ. 23.And Jeſus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Goſpel ofVerſ. 1.And ſeeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he was ſet his Diſciples camVerſ. 2.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſaying.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſVerſ. 3.Bleſſed are the poor in ſpirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.Bleſsed are] It is not ſVerſ. 4.Bleſſed are they that mourn: for they ſhall be comforted.Bleſſed are they that mourn] 1. It Verſ. 5.Bleſſed are the meek: for they ſhall inherit the Earth.Bleſed are the meek] 1. As they that Verſ. 6.Bleſſed are they which do hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe: for they ſhall be filled.BVerſ. 7.Bleſſed are the mercifull: for they ſhall obtain mercy.Bleſſed are the mercifull] The objectVerſ. 8.Bleſſed are the pure in heart: for they ſhall ſee God.Bleſſed are the pure in heart] That isVerſ. 9.Bleſſed are the peace-makers: for they ſhall be called the children of God.Bleſſed are the PVerſ. 10.Bleſſed are they which are perſecuted for righteouſneſſe ſake: for theirs is the kingdome oVerſ. 11.Bleſſed are ye, when men ſhall revile you, and perſecute you, and ſhall ſay all manner of eVerſ. 12.Rejoyce and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: For ſo perſecuted they tVerſ. 13.Ye are the ſalt of the earth: but if the ſalt have loſt his ſavour, wherewith ſhall it be ſVerſ. 14.Ye are the light of the world. A city that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid.Ye are the light Verſ. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a buſhel: but on a candleſtick, and it givVerſ. 16.Let your light ſo ſhine before men that they may ſee your good works, and glorifie your FatVerſ. 17.Think not that I am come to deſtroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to deſtroy but tVerſ. 18.But verily I ſay unto you, Till heaven and earth paſſe, one jot, or one tittle ſhall in no Verſ. 19.Whoſoever therefore ſimll break one of theſe leaſt Commandments, and ſhall teach men ſo, heVerſ. 20.For I ſay unto you, That except your righteouſneſſe ſhall exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Verſ. 21.Ye have heard, that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not kill: and, Whoſoever ſhVerſ. 22.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever is angry with his brother without a cauſe, ſhall be in dVerſ. 23.Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembreſt that thy brother hath oVerſ. 24.Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, firſt be reconciled to thy brother, Verſ. 25.Agree with thine adverſary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him: liſt at any time thVerſ. 26.Verily I ſay unto thee: thou ſhalt by no means come out thence, till thou haſt paid the uttVerſ. 27.Ye have heard that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not commit adultery.Ye have Verſ. 28.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever looketh on a woman to luſt after her, hath committed aduVerſ. 29.And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitableVerſ. 30.And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitable Verſ. 31.It hath been ſaid, Whoſoever ſhall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorceVerſ. 32.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever ſhall put away his wife, ſaving for the cauſe of fornicaVerſ. 33.Again, ye have heard that it hath been ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not forſwear thVerſ. 34.But I ſay unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne:Verſ. 35.NorVerſ. 37.But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whatſoever is more then theſe comethVerſ. 38.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.You have hVerſ. 39.But I ſay unto you, that ye reſiſt not evil: but whoſoever ſhall ſmite thee on the right chVerſ. 40.And if any will ſue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloke alſo.AnVerſ. 41.And whoſoever ſhall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.And whoſoever ſhall compel Verſ. 42.Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.GiVerſ. 43.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine enemy.YVerſ. 44.But I ſay unto you, Love your enemies, bleſſe them that curſe you, do good to them that hatVerſ. 45.That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh the Sun to riſVerſ. 46.For if ye love them, which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the ſamVerſ. 47.And if ye ſalute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? Do not even the PublicaVerſ. 48.Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.Beye therefore pMATTHEW VI. Verſ. 1.Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe ye Verſ. 2.Therefore when thou doeſt thine alms, do not ſound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites Verſ. 3.But when thou doſt alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth.But when thou dVerſ. 4.That thine alms may be in ſecret: And thy Father which ſeeth in ſecret, himſelf ſhall rewardVerſ. 5.And when thou prayeſt, thou ſhalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray ſtandiVerſ. 6.But thou when thou prayeſt, enter into thy cloſet, and when thou haſt ſhut thy door, pray toVerſ. 7.But when ye pray, uſe not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they ſhalVerſ. 8.Be not therefore like unto them: For your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, beforeVerſ. 9.After this manner therefore pray ye. &c.After this manner, &c.] Luke ſayes, When ye pray, SaVerſ. 10.Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.Thy kingdom come.] 1. ThreeVerſ. 11.Give us this day our daily bread.Give us this day, &c.] 1. From the order, we learn1. That Verſ. 12.And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debters.And] From this conjunction pointing outVerſ. 13.And leade us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and tVerſ. 14.For if ye forgive men their treſpaſſes, your heavenly Father will alſo forgive you.For if yVerſ. 15.But if ye forgive not men their treſpaſſes, neither will your Father forgive your trepaſſesVerſ. 16.Moreover, when ye faſt, be not as the hypocrites, of a ſad countenance, for they disfigure Verſ. 17.But thou when thou faſteſt, anoint thy head and waſh thy face.Verſ. 18.That thou appear notVerſ. 19.Lay not up for your ſelves treaſures upon earth, where moth and ruſt doth corrupt, and wherVerſ. 20.But lay up for your ſelves treaſures in heaven, where neither moth nor ruſt doth corrupt, aVerſ. 21.For where your treaſure is, there will your heart be alſo.For where your treaſure is] This Verſ. 22.The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be ſingle, thy whole body ſhall beVerſ. 24.No man can ſerve two maſters: for either he will hate the one and love the other, or elſe hVerſ. 25.Therefore, I ſay unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you ſhall eat, or what ye ſhVerſ. 26.Behold the fowls of the air, for they ſow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns,Verſ. 27.Which of you by taking thought, can adde one cubit to his ſtature?Which of you by taking thVerſ. 28.And why take ye thought for raiment? Conſider the Lilies of the field, how they grow: they Verſ. 30.Wherefore if God ſo clothe the graſſe of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is caſt Verſ. 32.(For after all theſe things do the Gentiles ſeek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye Verſ. 33.But ſeek ye firſt the kingdom of God and his righteouſneſſe, and all theſe things ſhall be Verſ. 34.Take therfore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow ſhall take thought for the things oVerſ. 1.Judge not, that ye be not judged.Verſ. 2.For with what judgement ye judge, ye ſhall be judgeVerſ. 3.And why beholdeſt thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but conſidereſt not the beam thVerſ. 4.Or how wilt thou ſay to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, Verſ 5.Thou hypocrite, firſt caſt out the beam out of thine own eye, and then ſhalt thou ſee clearlyVerſ. 6.Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither caſt ye your pearles before ſwine, leſt tVerſ. 7.Ask, and it ſhall be given you, ſeek, and ye ſhall finde: knock, and it ſhall be opened untoVerſ. 8.For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that ſeekth, findeth: and to him that knocketh,Verſ. 9.Or what man is there of you, whom if his ſonne ask bread, will he give him a ſtone?Verſ. 10.Verſ. 11.If ye then being evil, krow how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more ſhall Verſ. 13.Enter ye in at the ſtrait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to Verſ. 14.Becauſe ſtrait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there beVerſ. 15.Beware of falſe prophets which come to you in ſheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravenVerſ. 16.Ye ſhall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thiſtles?By tVerſ. 17.Even ſo every good tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fVerſ. 21.Not every one that ſaith unto me, Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven: but Verſ. 22.Many will ſay to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not propheſied in thy Name? and in thyVerſ. 23.And then will I profeſſe unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that work iniquityVerſ. 24.Therefore whoſoever heareth theſe ſayings of mine, and doth them, I will liken him unto a wVerſ. 28.And it came to paſſe, when Jeſus had ended theſe ſayings, the people were aſtoniſhed at his
    _ MATTHEW V.
MATTHEW IV.I.Then was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the wilderneſs, to be tempted of the devil.THeVerſ. 2.And when he had faſted fourty dayes and fourty nights, he was afterward an hungred.And when Verſ. 3.And when the tempter came to him, he ſaid, If thou be the ſonne of God, command that theſe ſVerſ. 4.But he anſwered and ſaid, It is written, Man ſhall not live by bread alone, but by every worVerſ. 5.Then the devil taketh him up into the holy City, and ſetteth him on a pinacle of the Temple.Verſ. 6.And ſaith unto him, If thou be the ſonne of God, Caſt thy ſelf down: For it is written. He ſVerſ. 7.Jeſus ſaid unto him, It is written again, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God.And Jeſus ſaVerſ. 8.Again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and ſheweth him all the kingdVerſ. 9.And ſaith unto him, All theſe things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worſhip meVerſ. 10.Then ſaith Jeſus unto him, Get thee behinde, Satan: for it is written, Thou ſhalt worſhip tVerſ. 11.Then the devil leaveth him, and behold Angels came and miniſtred unto him.Then] 1. When ourVerſ. 12.Now when Jeſus had heard that John was caſt into priſon, he departed into Galilee.Now when Verſ. 13.And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the ſea-coaſt, in the bVerſ. 14.That it might be fulfilled which was ſpoken by Eſaias the Prophet, ſaying.That it might be Verſ. 15.The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the ſea beyond Jordan, GalileVerſ. 16.The people which ſat in darkneſſe, ſaw great light: and to them which ſate in the region anVerſ. 17.From that time Jeſus began to preach, and to ſay, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at Verſ. 18.And Jeſus walking by the ſea of Galilee, ſaw two brethren, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew Verſ. 19.And he ſaith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men.And he ſaith unto theVerſ. 20.And they ſtraightway left their nets, and followed him.And they ſtraightway left their netsVerſ. 21.And going on from thence, he ſaw other two brethren, James the ſonne of Zebedee, and John hVerſ. 23.And Jeſus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Goſpel ofVerſ. 1.And ſeeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he was ſet his Diſciples camVerſ. 2.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſaying.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſVerſ. 3.Bleſſed are the poor in ſpirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.Bleſsed are] It is not ſVerſ. 4.Bleſſed are they that mourn: for they ſhall be comforted.Bleſſed are they that mourn] 1. It Verſ. 5.Bleſſed are the meek: for they ſhall inherit the Earth.Bleſed are the meek] 1. As they that Verſ. 6.Bleſſed are they which do hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe: for they ſhall be filled.BVerſ. 7.Bleſſed are the mercifull: for they ſhall obtain mercy.Bleſſed are the mercifull] The objectVerſ. 8.Bleſſed are the pure in heart: for they ſhall ſee God.Bleſſed are the pure in heart] That isVerſ. 9.Bleſſed are the peace-makers: for they ſhall be called the children of God.Bleſſed are the PVerſ. 10.Bleſſed are they which are perſecuted for righteouſneſſe ſake: for theirs is the kingdome oVerſ. 11.Bleſſed are ye, when men ſhall revile you, and perſecute you, and ſhall ſay all manner of eVerſ. 12.Rejoyce and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: For ſo perſecuted they tVerſ. 13.Ye are the ſalt of the earth: but if the ſalt have loſt his ſavour, wherewith ſhall it be ſVerſ. 14.Ye are the light of the world. A city that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid.Ye are the light Verſ. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a buſhel: but on a candleſtick, and it givVerſ. 16.Let your light ſo ſhine before men that they may ſee your good works, and glorifie your FatVerſ. 17.Think not that I am come to deſtroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to deſtroy but tVerſ. 18.But verily I ſay unto you, Till heaven and earth paſſe, one jot, or one tittle ſhall in no Verſ. 19.Whoſoever therefore ſimll break one of theſe leaſt Commandments, and ſhall teach men ſo, heVerſ. 20.For I ſay unto you, That except your righteouſneſſe ſhall exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Verſ. 21.Ye have heard, that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not kill: and, Whoſoever ſhVerſ. 22.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever is angry with his brother without a cauſe, ſhall be in dVerſ. 23.Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembreſt that thy brother hath oVerſ. 24.Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, firſt be reconciled to thy brother, Verſ. 25.Agree with thine adverſary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him: liſt at any time thVerſ. 26.Verily I ſay unto thee: thou ſhalt by no means come out thence, till thou haſt paid the uttVerſ. 27.Ye have heard that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not commit adultery.Ye have Verſ. 28.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever looketh on a woman to luſt after her, hath committed aduVerſ. 29.And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitableVerſ. 30.And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitable Verſ. 31.It hath been ſaid, Whoſoever ſhall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorceVerſ. 32.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever ſhall put away his wife, ſaving for the cauſe of fornicaVerſ. 33.Again, ye have heard that it hath been ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not forſwear thVerſ. 34.But I ſay unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne:Verſ. 35.NorVerſ. 37.But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whatſoever is more then theſe comethVerſ. 38.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.You have hVerſ. 39.But I ſay unto you, that ye reſiſt not evil: but whoſoever ſhall ſmite thee on the right chVerſ. 40.And if any will ſue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloke alſo.AnVerſ. 41.And whoſoever ſhall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.And whoſoever ſhall compel Verſ. 42.Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.GiVerſ. 43.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine enemy.YVerſ. 44.But I ſay unto you, Love your enemies, bleſſe them that curſe you, do good to them that hatVerſ. 45.That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh the Sun to riſVerſ. 46.For if ye love them, which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the ſamVerſ. 47.And if ye ſalute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? Do not even the PublicaVerſ. 48.Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.Beye therefore pMATTHEW VI. Verſ. 1.Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe ye Verſ. 2.Therefore when thou doeſt thine alms, do not ſound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites Verſ. 3.But when thou doſt alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth.But when thou dVerſ. 4.That thine alms may be in ſecret: And thy Father which ſeeth in ſecret, himſelf ſhall rewardVerſ. 5.And when thou prayeſt, thou ſhalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray ſtandiVerſ. 6.But thou when thou prayeſt, enter into thy cloſet, and when thou haſt ſhut thy door, pray toVerſ. 7.But when ye pray, uſe not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they ſhalVerſ. 8.Be not therefore like unto them: For your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, beforeVerſ. 9.After this manner therefore pray ye. &c.After this manner, &c.] Luke ſayes, When ye pray, SaVerſ. 10.Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.Thy kingdom come.] 1. ThreeVerſ. 11.Give us this day our daily bread.Give us this day, &c.] 1. From the order, we learn1. That Verſ. 12.And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debters.And] From this conjunction pointing outVerſ. 13.And leade us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and tVerſ. 14.For if ye forgive men their treſpaſſes, your heavenly Father will alſo forgive you.For if yVerſ. 15.But if ye forgive not men their treſpaſſes, neither will your Father forgive your trepaſſesVerſ. 16.Moreover, when ye faſt, be not as the hypocrites, of a ſad countenance, for they disfigure Verſ. 17.But thou when thou faſteſt, anoint thy head and waſh thy face.Verſ. 18.That thou appear notVerſ. 19.Lay not up for your ſelves treaſures upon earth, where moth and ruſt doth corrupt, and wherVerſ. 20.But lay up for your ſelves treaſures in heaven, where neither moth nor ruſt doth corrupt, aVerſ. 21.For where your treaſure is, there will your heart be alſo.For where your treaſure is] This Verſ. 22.The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be ſingle, thy whole body ſhall beVerſ. 24.No man can ſerve two maſters: for either he will hate the one and love the other, or elſe hVerſ. 25.Therefore, I ſay unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you ſhall eat, or what ye ſhVerſ. 26.Behold the fowls of the air, for they ſow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns,Verſ. 27.Which of you by taking thought, can adde one cubit to his ſtature?Which of you by taking thVerſ. 28.And why take ye thought for raiment? Conſider the Lilies of the field, how they grow: they Verſ. 30.Wherefore if God ſo clothe the graſſe of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is caſt Verſ. 32.(For after all theſe things do the Gentiles ſeek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye Verſ. 33.But ſeek ye firſt the kingdom of God and his righteouſneſſe, and all theſe things ſhall be Verſ. 34.Take therfore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow ſhall take thought for the things oVerſ. 1.Judge not, that ye be not judged.Verſ. 2.For with what judgement ye judge, ye ſhall be judgeVerſ. 3.And why beholdeſt thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but conſidereſt not the beam thVerſ. 4.Or how wilt thou ſay to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, Verſ 5.Thou hypocrite, firſt caſt out the beam out of thine own eye, and then ſhalt thou ſee clearlyVerſ. 6.Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither caſt ye your pearles before ſwine, leſt tVerſ. 7.Ask, and it ſhall be given you, ſeek, and ye ſhall finde: knock, and it ſhall be opened untoVerſ. 8.For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that ſeekth, findeth: and to him that knocketh,Verſ. 9.Or what man is there of you, whom if his ſonne ask bread, will he give him a ſtone?Verſ. 10.Verſ. 11.If ye then being evil, krow how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more ſhall Verſ. 13.Enter ye in at the ſtrait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to Verſ. 14.Becauſe ſtrait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there beVerſ. 15.Beware of falſe prophets which come to you in ſheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravenVerſ. 16.Ye ſhall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thiſtles?By tVerſ. 17.Even ſo every good tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fVerſ. 21.Not every one that ſaith unto me, Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven: but Verſ. 22.Many will ſay to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not propheſied in thy Name? and in thyVerſ. 23.And then will I profeſſe unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that work iniquityVerſ. 24.Therefore whoſoever heareth theſe ſayings of mine, and doth them, I will liken him unto a wVerſ. 28.And it came to paſſe, when Jeſus had ended theſe ſayings, the people were aſtoniſhed at hisMATTHEW VI. Verſ. 1.Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe ye MATTHEW IV.I.Then was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the wilderneſs, to be tempted of the devil.THeVerſ. 2.And when he had faſted fourty dayes and fourty nights, he was afterward an hungred.And when Verſ. 3.And when the tempter came to him, he ſaid, If thou be the ſonne of God, command that theſe ſVerſ. 4.But he anſwered and ſaid, It is written, Man ſhall not live by bread alone, but by every worVerſ. 5.Then the devil taketh him up into the holy City, and ſetteth him on a pinacle of the Temple.Verſ. 6.And ſaith unto him, If thou be the ſonne of God, Caſt thy ſelf down: For it is written. He ſVerſ. 7.Jeſus ſaid unto him, It is written again, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God.And Jeſus ſaVerſ. 8.Again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and ſheweth him all the kingdVerſ. 9.And ſaith unto him, All theſe things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worſhip meVerſ. 10.Then ſaith Jeſus unto him, Get thee behinde, Satan: for it is written, Thou ſhalt worſhip tVerſ. 11.Then the devil leaveth him, and behold Angels came and miniſtred unto him.Then] 1. When ourVerſ. 12.Now when Jeſus had heard that John was caſt into priſon, he departed into Galilee.Now when Verſ. 13.And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the ſea-coaſt, in the bVerſ. 14.That it might be fulfilled which was ſpoken by Eſaias the Prophet, ſaying.That it might be Verſ. 15.The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the ſea beyond Jordan, GalileVerſ. 16.The people which ſat in darkneſſe, ſaw great light: and to them which ſate in the region anVerſ. 17.From that time Jeſus began to preach, and to ſay, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at Verſ. 18.And Jeſus walking by the ſea of Galilee, ſaw two brethren, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew Verſ. 19.And he ſaith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men.And he ſaith unto theVerſ. 20.And they ſtraightway left their nets, and followed him.And they ſtraightway left their netsVerſ. 21.And going on from thence, he ſaw other two brethren, James the ſonne of Zebedee, and John hVerſ. 23.And Jeſus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Goſpel ofVerſ. 1.And ſeeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he was ſet his Diſciples camVerſ. 2.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſaying.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſVerſ. 3.Bleſſed are the poor in ſpirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.Bleſsed are] It is not ſVerſ. 4.Bleſſed are they that mourn: for they ſhall be comforted.Bleſſed are they that mourn] 1. It Verſ. 5.Bleſſed are the meek: for they ſhall inherit the Earth.Bleſed are the meek] 1. As they that Verſ. 6.Bleſſed are they which do hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe: for they ſhall be filled.BVerſ. 7.Bleſſed are the mercifull: for they ſhall obtain mercy.Bleſſed are the mercifull] The objectVerſ. 8.Bleſſed are the pure in heart: for they ſhall ſee God.Bleſſed are the pure in heart] That isVerſ. 9.Bleſſed are the peace-makers: for they ſhall be called the children of God.Bleſſed are the PVerſ. 10.Bleſſed are they which are perſecuted for righteouſneſſe ſake: for theirs is the kingdome oVerſ. 11.Bleſſed are ye, when men ſhall revile you, and perſecute you, and ſhall ſay all manner of eVerſ. 12.Rejoyce and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: For ſo perſecuted they tVerſ. 13.Ye are the ſalt of the earth: but if the ſalt have loſt his ſavour, wherewith ſhall it be ſVerſ. 14.Ye are the light of the world. A city that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid.Ye are the light Verſ. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a buſhel: but on a candleſtick, and it givVerſ. 16.Let your light ſo ſhine before men that they may ſee your good works, and glorifie your FatVerſ. 17.Think not that I am come to deſtroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to deſtroy but tVerſ. 18.But verily I ſay unto you, Till heaven and earth paſſe, one jot, or one tittle ſhall in no Verſ. 19.Whoſoever therefore ſimll break one of theſe leaſt Commandments, and ſhall teach men ſo, heVerſ. 20.For I ſay unto you, That except your righteouſneſſe ſhall exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Verſ. 21.Ye have heard, that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not kill: and, Whoſoever ſhVerſ. 22.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever is angry with his brother without a cauſe, ſhall be in dVerſ. 23.Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembreſt that thy brother hath oVerſ. 24.Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, firſt be reconciled to thy brother, Verſ. 25.Agree with thine adverſary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him: liſt at any time thVerſ. 26.Verily I ſay unto thee: thou ſhalt by no means come out thence, till thou haſt paid the uttVerſ. 27.Ye have heard that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not commit adultery.Ye have Verſ. 28.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever looketh on a woman to luſt after her, hath committed aduVerſ. 29.And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitableVerſ. 30.And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitable Verſ. 31.It hath been ſaid, Whoſoever ſhall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorceVerſ. 32.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever ſhall put away his wife, ſaving for the cauſe of fornicaVerſ. 33.Again, ye have heard that it hath been ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not forſwear thVerſ. 34.But I ſay unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne:Verſ. 35.NorVerſ. 37.But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whatſoever is more then theſe comethVerſ. 38.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.You have hVerſ. 39.But I ſay unto you, that ye reſiſt not evil: but whoſoever ſhall ſmite thee on the right chVerſ. 40.And if any will ſue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloke alſo.AnVerſ. 41.And whoſoever ſhall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.And whoſoever ſhall compel Verſ. 42.Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.GiVerſ. 43.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine enemy.YVerſ. 44.But I ſay unto you, Love your enemies, bleſſe them that curſe you, do good to them that hatVerſ. 45.That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh the Sun to riſVerſ. 46.For if ye love them, which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the ſamVerſ. 47.And if ye ſalute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? Do not even the PublicaVerſ. 48.Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.Beye therefore pMATTHEW VI. Verſ. 1.Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe ye Verſ. 2.Therefore when thou doeſt thine alms, do not ſound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites Verſ. 3.But when thou doſt alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth.But when thou dVerſ. 4.That thine alms may be in ſecret: And thy Father which ſeeth in ſecret, himſelf ſhall rewardVerſ. 5.And when thou prayeſt, thou ſhalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray ſtandiVerſ. 6.But thou when thou prayeſt, enter into thy cloſet, and when thou haſt ſhut thy door, pray toVerſ. 7.But when ye pray, uſe not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they ſhalVerſ. 8.Be not therefore like unto them: For your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, beforeVerſ. 9.After this manner therefore pray ye. &c.After this manner, &c.] Luke ſayes, When ye pray, SaVerſ. 10.Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.Thy kingdom come.] 1. ThreeVerſ. 11.Give us this day our daily bread.Give us this day, &c.] 1. From the order, we learn1. That Verſ. 12.And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debters.And] From this conjunction pointing outVerſ. 13.And leade us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and tVerſ. 14.For if ye forgive men their treſpaſſes, your heavenly Father will alſo forgive you.For if yVerſ. 15.But if ye forgive not men their treſpaſſes, neither will your Father forgive your trepaſſesVerſ. 16.Moreover, when ye faſt, be not as the hypocrites, of a ſad countenance, for they disfigure Verſ. 17.But thou when thou faſteſt, anoint thy head and waſh thy face.Verſ. 18.That thou appear notVerſ. 19.Lay not up for your ſelves treaſures upon earth, where moth and ruſt doth corrupt, and wherVerſ. 20.But lay up for your ſelves treaſures in heaven, where neither moth nor ruſt doth corrupt, aVerſ. 21.For where your treaſure is, there will your heart be alſo.For where your treaſure is] This Verſ. 22.The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be ſingle, thy whole body ſhall beVerſ. 24.No man can ſerve two maſters: for either he will hate the one and love the other, or elſe hVerſ. 25.Therefore, I ſay unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you ſhall eat, or what ye ſhVerſ. 26.Behold the fowls of the air, for they ſow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns,Verſ. 27.Which of you by taking thought, can adde one cubit to his ſtature?Which of you by taking thVerſ. 28.And why take ye thought for raiment? Conſider the Lilies of the field, how they grow: they Verſ. 30.Wherefore if God ſo clothe the graſſe of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is caſt Verſ. 32.(For after all theſe things do the Gentiles ſeek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye Verſ. 33.But ſeek ye firſt the kingdom of God and his righteouſneſſe, and all theſe things ſhall be Verſ. 34.Take therfore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow ſhall take thought for the things oVerſ. 1.Judge not, that ye be not judged.Verſ. 2.For with what judgement ye judge, ye ſhall be judgeVerſ. 3.And why beholdeſt thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but conſidereſt not the beam thVerſ. 4.Or how wilt thou ſay to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, Verſ 5.Thou hypocrite, firſt caſt out the beam out of thine own eye, and then ſhalt thou ſee clearlyVerſ. 6.Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither caſt ye your pearles before ſwine, leſt tVerſ. 7.Ask, and it ſhall be given you, ſeek, and ye ſhall finde: knock, and it ſhall be opened untoVerſ. 8.For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that ſeekth, findeth: and to him that knocketh,Verſ. 9.Or what man is there of you, whom if his ſonne ask bread, will he give him a ſtone?Verſ. 10.Verſ. 11.If ye then being evil, krow how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more ſhall Verſ. 13.Enter ye in at the ſtrait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to Verſ. 14.Becauſe ſtrait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there beVerſ. 15.Beware of falſe prophets which come to you in ſheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravenVerſ. 16.Ye ſhall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thiſtles?By tVerſ. 17.Even ſo every good tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fVerſ. 21.Not every one that ſaith unto me, Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven: but Verſ. 22.Many will ſay to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not propheſied in thy Name? and in thyVerſ. 23.And then will I profeſſe unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that work iniquityVerſ. 24.Therefore whoſoever heareth theſe ſayings of mine, and doth them, I will liken him unto a wVerſ. 28.And it came to paſſe, when Jeſus had ended theſe ſayings, the people were aſtoniſhed at his
    _ MATTHEW VII.
MATTHEW IV.I.Then was Jeſus led up of the Spirit into the wilderneſs, to be tempted of the devil.THeVerſ. 2.And when he had faſted fourty dayes and fourty nights, he was afterward an hungred.And when Verſ. 3.And when the tempter came to him, he ſaid, If thou be the ſonne of God, command that theſe ſVerſ. 4.But he anſwered and ſaid, It is written, Man ſhall not live by bread alone, but by every worVerſ. 5.Then the devil taketh him up into the holy City, and ſetteth him on a pinacle of the Temple.Verſ. 6.And ſaith unto him, If thou be the ſonne of God, Caſt thy ſelf down: For it is written. He ſVerſ. 7.Jeſus ſaid unto him, It is written again, Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God.And Jeſus ſaVerſ. 8.Again the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and ſheweth him all the kingdVerſ. 9.And ſaith unto him, All theſe things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worſhip meVerſ. 10.Then ſaith Jeſus unto him, Get thee behinde, Satan: for it is written, Thou ſhalt worſhip tVerſ. 11.Then the devil leaveth him, and behold Angels came and miniſtred unto him.Then] 1. When ourVerſ. 12.Now when Jeſus had heard that John was caſt into priſon, he departed into Galilee.Now when Verſ. 13.And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon the ſea-coaſt, in the bVerſ. 14.That it might be fulfilled which was ſpoken by Eſaias the Prophet, ſaying.That it might be Verſ. 15.The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the ſea beyond Jordan, GalileVerſ. 16.The people which ſat in darkneſſe, ſaw great light: and to them which ſate in the region anVerſ. 17.From that time Jeſus began to preach, and to ſay, Repent, for the Kingdome of Heaven is at Verſ. 18.And Jeſus walking by the ſea of Galilee, ſaw two brethren, Simon, called Peter, and Andrew Verſ. 19.And he ſaith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fiſhers of men.And he ſaith unto theVerſ. 20.And they ſtraightway left their nets, and followed him.And they ſtraightway left their netsVerſ. 21.And going on from thence, he ſaw other two brethren, James the ſonne of Zebedee, and John hVerſ. 23.And Jeſus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Goſpel ofVerſ. 1.And ſeeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he was ſet his Diſciples camVerſ. 2.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſaying.And he opened his mouth, and taught them, ſVerſ. 3.Bleſſed are the poor in ſpirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.Bleſsed are] It is not ſVerſ. 4.Bleſſed are they that mourn: for they ſhall be comforted.Bleſſed are they that mourn] 1. It Verſ. 5.Bleſſed are the meek: for they ſhall inherit the Earth.Bleſed are the meek] 1. As they that Verſ. 6.Bleſſed are they which do hunger and thirſt after righteouſneſſe: for they ſhall be filled.BVerſ. 7.Bleſſed are the mercifull: for they ſhall obtain mercy.Bleſſed are the mercifull] The objectVerſ. 8.Bleſſed are the pure in heart: for they ſhall ſee God.Bleſſed are the pure in heart] That isVerſ. 9.Bleſſed are the peace-makers: for they ſhall be called the children of God.Bleſſed are the PVerſ. 10.Bleſſed are they which are perſecuted for righteouſneſſe ſake: for theirs is the kingdome oVerſ. 11.Bleſſed are ye, when men ſhall revile you, and perſecute you, and ſhall ſay all manner of eVerſ. 12.Rejoyce and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: For ſo perſecuted they tVerſ. 13.Ye are the ſalt of the earth: but if the ſalt have loſt his ſavour, wherewith ſhall it be ſVerſ. 14.Ye are the light of the world. A city that is ſet on a hill cannot be hid.Ye are the light Verſ. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a buſhel: but on a candleſtick, and it givVerſ. 16.Let your light ſo ſhine before men that they may ſee your good works, and glorifie your FatVerſ. 17.Think not that I am come to deſtroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to deſtroy but tVerſ. 18.But verily I ſay unto you, Till heaven and earth paſſe, one jot, or one tittle ſhall in no Verſ. 19.Whoſoever therefore ſimll break one of theſe leaſt Commandments, and ſhall teach men ſo, heVerſ. 20.For I ſay unto you, That except your righteouſneſſe ſhall exceed the righteouſneſſe of the Verſ. 21.Ye have heard, that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not kill: and, Whoſoever ſhVerſ. 22.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever is angry with his brother without a cauſe, ſhall be in dVerſ. 23.Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembreſt that thy brother hath oVerſ. 24.Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, firſt be reconciled to thy brother, Verſ. 25.Agree with thine adverſary quickly whiles thou art in the way with him: liſt at any time thVerſ. 26.Verily I ſay unto thee: thou ſhalt by no means come out thence, till thou haſt paid the uttVerſ. 27.Ye have heard that it was ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not commit adultery.Ye have Verſ. 28.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever looketh on a woman to luſt after her, hath committed aduVerſ. 29.And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitableVerſ. 30.And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and caſt it from thee: For it is profitable Verſ. 31.It hath been ſaid, Whoſoever ſhall put away his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorceVerſ. 32.But I ſay unto you, That whoſoever ſhall put away his wife, ſaving for the cauſe of fornicaVerſ. 33.Again, ye have heard that it hath been ſaid by them of old time, Thou ſhalt not forſwear thVerſ. 34.But I ſay unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne:Verſ. 35.NorVerſ. 37.But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whatſoever is more then theſe comethVerſ. 38.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.You have hVerſ. 39.But I ſay unto you, that ye reſiſt not evil: but whoſoever ſhall ſmite thee on the right chVerſ. 40.And if any will ſue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloke alſo.AnVerſ. 41.And whoſoever ſhall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.And whoſoever ſhall compel Verſ. 42.Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.GiVerſ. 43.Ye have heard that it hath been ſaid, Thou ſhalt love thy Neighbour, and hate thine enemy.YVerſ. 44.But I ſay unto you, Love your enemies, bleſſe them that curſe you, do good to them that hatVerſ. 45.That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh the Sun to riſVerſ. 46.For if ye love them, which love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Publicans the ſamVerſ. 47.And if ye ſalute your brethren onely, what do you more then others? Do not even the PublicaVerſ. 48.Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.Beye therefore pMATTHEW VI. Verſ. 1.Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be ſeen of them: otherwiſe ye Verſ. 2.Therefore when thou doeſt thine alms, do not ſound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites Verſ. 3.But when thou doſt alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth.But when thou dVerſ. 4.That thine alms may be in ſecret: And thy Father which ſeeth in ſecret, himſelf ſhall rewardVerſ. 5.And when thou prayeſt, thou ſhalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray ſtandiVerſ. 6.But thou when thou prayeſt, enter into thy cloſet, and when thou haſt ſhut thy door, pray toVerſ. 7.But when ye pray, uſe not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they ſhalVerſ. 8.Be not therefore like unto them: For your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, beforeVerſ. 9.After this manner therefore pray ye. &c.After this manner, &c.] Luke ſayes, When ye pray, SaVerſ. 10.Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.Thy kingdom come.] 1. ThreeVerſ. 11.Give us this day our daily bread.Give us this day, &c.] 1. From the order, we learn1. That Verſ. 12.And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debters.And] From this conjunction pointing outVerſ. 13.And leade us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and tVerſ. 14.For if ye forgive men their treſpaſſes, your heavenly Father will alſo forgive you.For if yVerſ. 15.But if ye forgive not men their treſpaſſes, neither will your Father forgive your trepaſſesVerſ. 16.Moreover, when ye faſt, be not as the hypocrites, of a ſad countenance, for they disfigure Verſ. 17.But thou when thou faſteſt, anoint thy head and waſh thy face.Verſ. 18.That thou appear notVerſ. 19.Lay not up for your ſelves treaſures upon earth, where moth and ruſt doth corrupt, and wherVerſ. 20.But lay up for your ſelves treaſures in heaven, where neither moth nor ruſt doth corrupt, aVerſ. 21.For where your treaſure is, there will your heart be alſo.For where your treaſure is] This Verſ. 22.The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be ſingle, thy whole body ſhall beVerſ. 24.No man can ſerve two maſters: for either he will hate the one and love the other, or elſe hVerſ. 25.Therefore, I ſay unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you ſhall eat, or what ye ſhVerſ. 26.Behold the fowls of the air, for they ſow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns,Verſ. 27.Which of you by taking thought, can adde one cubit to his ſtature?Which of you by taking thVerſ. 28.And why take ye thought for raiment? Conſider the Lilies of the field, how they grow: they Verſ. 30.Wherefore if God ſo clothe the graſſe of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is caſt Verſ. 32.(For after all theſe things do the Gentiles ſeek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye Verſ. 33.But ſeek ye firſt the kingdom of God and his righteouſneſſe, and all theſe things ſhall be Verſ. 34.Take therfore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow ſhall take thought for the things oVerſ. 1.Judge not, that ye be not judged.Verſ. 2.For with what judgement ye judge, ye ſhall be judgeVerſ. 3.And why beholdeſt thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but conſidereſt not the beam thVerſ. 4.Or how wilt thou ſay to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye, and behold, Verſ 5.Thou hypocrite, firſt caſt out the beam out of thine own eye, and then ſhalt thou ſee clearlyVerſ. 6.Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither caſt ye your pearles before ſwine, leſt tVerſ. 7.Ask, and it ſhall be given you, ſeek, and ye ſhall finde: knock, and it ſhall be opened untoVerſ. 8.For every one that asketh, receiveth: and he that ſeekth, findeth: and to him that knocketh,Verſ. 9.Or what man is there of you, whom if his ſonne ask bread, will he give him a ſtone?Verſ. 10.Verſ. 11.If ye then being evil, krow how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more ſhall Verſ. 13.Enter ye in at the ſtrait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to Verſ. 14.Becauſe ſtrait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there beVerſ. 15.Beware of falſe prophets which come to you in ſheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravenVerſ. 16.Ye ſhall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thiſtles?By tVerſ. 17.Even ſo every good tree bringeth forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fVerſ. 21.Not every one that ſaith unto me, Lord, Lord, ſhall enter into the Kingdome of Heaven: but Verſ. 22.Many will ſay to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not propheſied in thy Name? and in thyVerſ. 23.And then will I profeſſe unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that work iniquityVerſ. 24.Therefore whoſoever heareth theſe ſayings of mine, and doth them, I will liken him unto a wVerſ. 28.And it came to paſſe, when Jeſus had ended theſe ſayings, the people were aſtoniſhed at his
**Types of content**

  * Oh, Mr. Jourdain, there is **prose** in there!

There are 53 **omitted** fragments! 
 @__reason__ (53) : duplicate (1), illegible (22), foreign (30)  •  @__extent__ (23) : 1 page (1), 1 letter (20), 2 letters (1), 1 word (1)  •  @__resp__ (22) : #UOM (22)

**Character listing**


|Text|string(s)|codepoint(s)|
|---|---|---|
|Latin-1 Supplement|àè|224 232|
|Latin Extended-A|œſ|339 383|
|Latin Extended-B|Ʋ|434|
|Greek|ΠΑΝΘΕΟΛΓΙ|928 913 925 920 917 927 923 915 921|
|GreekandCoptic|ΠΑΝΘΕΟΛΓΙ|928 913 925 920 917 927 923 915 921|
|General Punctuation|•|8226|
|Geometric Shapes|▪◊|9642 9674|
|CJKSymbolsandPunctuation|〈〉|12296 12297|

##Tag Usage Summary##

###Header Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__author__|2||
|2.|__availability__|1||
|3.|__biblFull__|1||
|4.|__change__|5||
|5.|__date__|8| @__when__ (1) : 2013-12 (1)|
|6.|__edition__|1||
|7.|__editionStmt__|1||
|8.|__editorialDecl__|1||
|9.|__encodingDesc__|1||
|10.|__extent__|2||
|11.|__fileDesc__|1||
|12.|__idno__|7| @__type__ (7) : DLPS (1), STC (3), EEBO-CITATION (1), PROQUEST (1), VID (1)|
|13.|__keywords__|1| @__scheme__ (1) : http://authorities.loc.gov/ (1)|
|14.|__label__|5||
|15.|__langUsage__|1||
|16.|__language__|1| @__ident__ (1) : eng (1)|
|17.|__listPrefixDef__|1||
|18.|__note__|6||
|19.|__notesStmt__|2||
|20.|__p__|11||
|21.|__prefixDef__|2| @__ident__ (2) : tcp (1), char (1)  •  @__matchPattern__ (2) : ([0-9\-]+):([0-9IVX]+) (1), (.+) (1)  •  @__replacementPattern__ (2) : http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=$1&page=$2 (1), https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/Texts/master/tcpchars.xml#$1 (1)|
|22.|__profileDesc__|1||
|23.|__projectDesc__|1||
|24.|__pubPlace__|2||
|25.|__publicationStmt__|2||
|26.|__publisher__|2||
|27.|__ref__|1| @__target__ (1) : http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/. (1)|
|28.|__revisionDesc__|1||
|29.|__seriesStmt__|1||
|30.|__sourceDesc__|1||
|31.|__term__|2||
|32.|__textClass__|1||
|33.|__title__|3||
|34.|__titleStmt__|2||


###Text Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__bibl__|132||
|2.|__body__|1||
|3.|__desc__|53||
|4.|__div__|125| @__type__ (125) : title_page (1), half_title (1), to_the_reader (1), commentary_on_Matthew (1), chapter (4), verse (113), verses (4)  •  @__n__ (121) : 4 (5), 1 (3), 2 (3), 3 (4), 5 (5), 6 (5), 7 (5), 8 (4), 9 (3), 10 (3), 11 (3), 12 (3), 13 (4), 14 (4), 15 (4), 16 (4), 17 (2), 18 (2), 19 (3), 20 (3), 21-22 (1), 23 (3), 21 (3), 22 (2), 24 (2), 25 (2), 26 (2), 27 (2), 28 (1), 29 (1), 30 (1), 31 (1), 32 (2), 33 (2), 34-36 (1), 37 (1), 38 (1), 39 (1), 40 (1), 41 (1), 42 (1), 43 (1), 44 (1), 45 (1), 46 (1), 47 (1), 48 (1), 17 18 (1), 22 23 (1), 28 29 (1), 30 31 (1), 34 (1), 1 2 (1), 9 10 (1), 11 12 (1), 17 18 19 20 (1), 24-25 (1), 28-29 (1)|
|5.|__epigraph__|117||
|6.|__front__|1||
|7.|__g__|1196| @__ref__ (1196) : char:EOLhyphen (1184), char:V (11), char:punc (1)|
|8.|__gap__|53| @__reason__ (53) : duplicate (1), illegible (22), foreign (30)  •  @__extent__ (23) : 1 page (1), 1 letter (20), 2 letters (1), 1 word (1)  •  @__resp__ (22) : #UOM (22)|
|9.|__head__|4||
|10.|__hi__|1951| @__rend__ (49) : sup (49)|
|11.|__item__|12||
|12.|__label__|6||
|13.|__list__|5||
|14.|__note__|3| @__n__ (2) : a (1), b (1)  •  @__place__ (3) : margin (3)|
|15.|__p__|1020| @__n__ (533) : 1 (94), 2 (174), 3 (108), 5 (33), 6 (23), 7 (14), 8 (10), 4 (65), 9 (4), 10 (4), 11 (2), 12 (1), 13 (1)|
|16.|__pb__|207| @__facs__ (207) : tcp:119918:1 (1), tcp:119918:2 (2), tcp:119918:3 (2), tcp:119918:4 (2), tcp:119918:5 (2), tcp:119918:6 (2), tcp:119918:7 (2), tcp:119918:8 (2), tcp:119918:9 (2), tcp:119918:10 (2), tcp:119918:11 (2), tcp:119918:12 (2), tcp:119918:13 (2), tcp:119918:14 (2), tcp:119918:15 (2), tcp:119918:16 (2), tcp:119918:17 (2), tcp:119918:18 (2), tcp:119918:19 (2), tcp:119918:20 (2), tcp:119918:21 (2), tcp:119918:22 (2), tcp:119918:23 (2), tcp:119918:24 (2), tcp:119918:25 (2), tcp:119918:26 (2), tcp:119918:27 (2), tcp:119918:28 (2), tcp:119918:29 (2), tcp:119918:30 (2), tcp:119918:31 (2), tcp:119918:32 (2), tcp:119918:33 (2), tcp:119918:34 (2), tcp:119918:35 (2), tcp:119918:36 (2), tcp:119918:37 (2), tcp:119918:38 (2), tcp:119918:39 (2), tcp:119918:40 (2), tcp:119918:41 (2), tcp:119918:42 (2), tcp:119918:43 (2), tcp:119918:44 (2), tcp:119918:45 (2), tcp:119918:46 (2), tcp:119918:47 (2), tcp:119918:48 (2), tcp:119918:49 (2), tcp:119918:50 (2), tcp:119918:51 (2), tcp:119918:52 (2), tcp:119918:53 (2), tcp:119918:54 (2), tcp:119918:55 (2), tcp:119918:56 (2), tcp:119918:57 (2), tcp:119918:58 (2), tcp:119918:59 (2), tcp:119918:60 (2), tcp:119918:61 (2), tcp:119918:62 (2), tcp:119918:63 (2), tcp:119918:64 (2), tcp:119918:65 (2), tcp:119918:66 (2), tcp:119918:67 (2), tcp:119918:68 (2), tcp:119918:69 (2), tcp:119918:70 (2), tcp:119918:71 (2), tcp:119918:72 (2), tcp:119918:73 (2), tcp:119918:74 (2), tcp:119918:75 (2), tcp:119918:76 (2), tcp:119918:77 (2), tcp:119918:78 (2), tcp:119918:79 (2), tcp:119918:80 (2), tcp:119918:81 (2), tcp:119918:82 (2), tcp:119918:83 (2), tcp:119918:84 (2), tcp:119918:85 (2), tcp:119918:86 (2), tcp:119918:87 (2), tcp:119918:88 (2), tcp:119918:89 (2), tcp:119918:90 (2), tcp:119918:91 (2), tcp:119918:92 (2), tcp:119918:93 (2), tcp:119918:94 (2), tcp:119918:95 (2), tcp:119918:96 (2), tcp:119918:97 (2), tcp:119918:98 (2), tcp:119918:99 (2), tcp:119918:100 (2), tcp:119918:101 (2), tcp:119918:102 (2), tcp:119918:103 (2), tcp:119918:104 (2)  •  @__rendition__ (3) : simple:additions (3)  •  @__n__ (182) : 1 (1), 2 (1), 3 (1), 4 (1), 5 (1), 6 (1), 7 (1), 8 (1), 9 (1), 10 (1), 11 (1), 12 (1), 13 (1), 14 (1), 15 (1), 16 (1), 17 (1), 18 (1), 19 (1), 20 (1), 21 (1), 22 (1), 23 (1), 24 (1), 25 (1), 26 (1), 27 (1), 28 (1), 29 (1), 30 (1), 31 (1), 32 (1), 33 (1), 34 (1), 35 (1), 36 (1), 37 (1), 38 (1), 39 (1), 40 (1), 41 (1), 42 (1), 43 (1), 44 (1), 45 (1), 46 (1), 47 (1), 48 (1), 49 (1), 50 (1), 51 (1), 52 (1), 53 (1), 54 (1), 55 (1), 56 (1), 57 (1), 58 (1), 59 (1), 60 (1), 61 (1), 62 (1), 63 (1), 64 (1), 65 (1), 66 (1), 67 (1), 68 (1), 69 (1), 70 (1), 71 (1), 72 (1), 73 (1), 74 (1), 75 (1), 76 (1), 77 (1), 78 (1), 79 (1), 80 (1), 81 (1), 82 (1), 83 (1), 84 (1), 85 (1), 86 (1), 87 (1), 88 (1), 89 (1), 90 (1), 91 (1), 92 (1), 93 (1), 94 (1), 95 (1), 96 (1), 97 (1), 98 (1), 99 (1), 100 (1), 101 (1), 102 (1), 103 (1), 104 (1), 105 (1), 106 (1), 107 (1), 108 (1), 109 (1), 110 (1), 111 (1), 112 (1), 113 (1), 114 (1), 115 (1), 116 (1), 117 (1), 118 (1), 119 (1), 120 (1), 121 (1), 122 (1), 123 (1), 124 (1), 125 (1), 126 (1), 127 (1), 128 (1), 129 (1), 130 (1), 131 (1), 132 (1), 133 (1), 134 (1), 135 (1), 136 (1), 137 (1), 138 (1), 139 (1), 140 (1), 141 (1), 142 (1), 143 (1), 144 (1), 145 (1), 146 (1), 147 (1), 148 (1), 149 (1), 150 (1), 151 (1), 152 (1), 153 (1), 154 (1), 155 (1), 156 (1), 157 (1), 158 (1), 159 (1), 160 (1), 161 (1), 162 (1), 163 (1), 164 (1), 165 (1), 166 (1), 167 (1), 168 (1), 169 (1), 170 (1), 171 (1), 172 (1), 173 (1), 174 (1), 175 (1), 176 (1), 177 (1), 178 (1), 179 (1), 180 (1), 181 (1), 182 (1)|
|17.|__q__|118||
|18.|__seg__|2| @__rend__ (2) : decorInit (2)|
|19.|__trailer__|1||
